In the previous lecture, we ended with
an interesting question: how is a graph
represented in memory? It's a question that
we need to answer, because algorithms we will
study in next chapters can be performed by us
humans, but it's better to do so with a computer,
I don't think you would like to work on a 100000
vertices graph. And to implement those algorithms,
we need to find a way to represent a graph. First
of all, before talking about representing a graph,
we first should be able to represent
a vertex and an edge. For vertices,
a vertex should have a unique id, to be
able to identify it among other vertices.
Usually, at least for examples we will work
with, a vertex is represented with an integer,
like in this graph, we have the vertex 0, the
vertex 1, etcetera. They can also be represented
with strings, for example when vertices represent
cities. Or if we need something more complex,
we can create a class. For example if
vertices of our graph represent people,
we can create a class Person that contains
the name, the age, and the salary for example.
And for edges, an edge usually contains two
things only, the source and the destination,
the two vertices it connects. So we can either
create a class Edge with two attributes,
or simply use a tuple of 2 elements. Note that for
weighted graphs, we need a third attribute weight.
Now we can move to the implementation of
a graph. In the introduction, we defined a
graph as a pair of sets V and E, V is the set of
vertices and E the set of edges. So we can think
of implementing a graph like that, we create a
class Graph where we will have two attributes: V,
the set of vertices, and E, the set of edges.
For this graph, we get this initialization.
However, when implementing a data structure, we
want it to be time and space efficient. Which is
not the case for this implementation, for example
a main operation we will often use in graph
algorithms is traversing the adjacent vertices
of a vertex, also called neighbors. And with
this implementation, we need to traverse all the
edges to find neighbors, which is not efficient.
This is why we will now introduce a popular graph
implementation that we will often use, it's the
adjacency list. Let's suppose that we have this
graph, take a pen and a paper, or a text editor,
and write each vertex followed by the list of
its neighbors, pause the video and try to do it.
By doing so, you should get something
like this, we have the vertex 0,
its neighbors are 1 4 and 3, we have the vertex
1, its neighbors are 0 2 5 and 4, and so on.
And that, is the adjacency list of this graph,
that's the concept, we have a list of key/value
pairs, where the key is the vertex, and
the value is the list of its neighbors.
Okay but how to implement it? You can see
that this structure is two dimensional,
so we have a choice to do for each
dimension. For the first dimension,
we have a list of key/value pairs, for that
we have two main possibilities. We can either
use an array where the key is the index of the
element, like 0 1 2 3 etcetera, or simply use a
hash table where the key is any hashable type,
like an integer or a string or something else.
And for the second dimension, the list of
neighbors, it's just a list. But even here,
we have multiple choices, main ones are using
an array, using a linked list, or using a set.
We have 2 possibilities for the first dimension,
3 possibilities for the second dimension,
so in total we have 6 possibilities.
We can implement an adjacency list as:
an array of arrays, an array of linked lists, an
array of sets, a hash table of vertex to array,
a hash table of vertex to linked
list, a hash table of vertex to set.
Ye that's cool but huh which one to choose? To
decide, we will once again analyze and compare,
that's how we do in computer science,
we rarely choose something randomly.
For the first dimension, we had the choice
between an array and a hash table. For an array,
we mentioned that the key is the index of
an element, the first one has the key 0,
the second one has the key 1, and so on. Which is
pretty limited, our vertices are not necessarily
represented with integers from 0 to n-1 like
in this graph, what if they're represented
with strings for example? That's the reason
why I think we should choose the hash table.
Even if accessing an element in an array is
usually slightly faster than with a hash table,
we should choose the array only when we
know that vertices of our graph will be
represented with integers from 0
to n-1, like the one on the left.
Now for the choice of the second dimension, there
isn't much difference between the 3 choices,
we can choose the set if we want fast
edge deletion and checking adjacency,
otherwise we can just use an array, it uses less
space than a set. Our final decision is that to
implement an adjacency list, we will generally
use a hash table of vertex to array, a hash table
where the key is the id of the vertex, and the
value is an array that contains its neighbors.
In code, we can have a class Graph that has an
attribute adj_list, the adjacency list, whose the
type is hash table of vertex to array. Now we need
to implement operations we've seen now. To add a
vertex, we have a parameter u that represents
the id of the vertex that we want to add.
And to add it, after checking it doesn't already
exist in the graph, we just give it a new array in
the hash table, at the key u, this is why
we assign an empty array to adj_list[u].
Removing a vertex now. We have a
vertex u that we want to remove.
We may think that to remove a vertex we just
need to delete its row from the hash table. Yes,
we need to do that, but we also need to remove
it from neighbor of all the other vertices, to
completely delete the edges, from both sides. In
code, after making sure that the vertex we want to
delete exists in the graph, we delete adj_list[u],
then we traverse remaining vertices. For each
one of them, if u is in adj_list[v], in other
words, neighbors of v, we remove it from there.
Next operation, adding an edge. We want
to add an edge from u to v, for that,
after checking that both u and v exist,
we just need to add v in neighbors of u,
we write, adj_list[u].append(v), that's it. But
if the graph is undirected, as said earlier,
we should also add u in neighbors of
v, we also write adj_list[v].append(u).
Also, for weighted graphs, we have a third
parameter w that represents the weight. In
that case, in neighbors of u we don't add v only,
we add a tuple that contains v, the destination,
and w, the weight of the edge. Remember that
an edge in a weighted graph has the source,
the destination, and the weight. And because
we need to insert both v and w, we use a tuple.
Now for removing an edge that goes from u to v,
we just need to remove v from neighbors of u. If
u exists and v is in adj_list[u], we remove v.
And if it's an undirected graph, we also do
the opposite, we remove u from neighbors of v.
Next operation, checking if there's an
edge from u to v. For that, if u exists,
we just check if v is in neighbors
of u, that's it. Next operation,
traversing neighbors of a vertex u. To do so, if
u is in the graph, we just traverse adj_list[u],
remember that the value in the adjacency
list contains the neighbors of the key.
By the way, I want to precise something about
neighbors. We said that neighbors of a vertex
are its adjacent vertices, for example here
is the vertex 3, and here are its neighbors.
But in a directed graph, are neighbors of a
vertex all vertices that it has a common edge
with? Or only those it can go to? Well, for
directed graphs, we must be precise, we have
out-neighbors and in-neighbors, out-neighbors
of a vertex u are vertices it can go to,
in other terms, vertices v such that
there exists an edge from u to v,
and in-neighbors of a vertex u are vertices we
can come from, in other terms, vertices v such
that there exists an edge from v to u this time.
And in an adjacency list of a directed graph,
for each vertex we store out-neighbors only,
vertices we can jump to, here is an example.
Last operation, building the adjacency list. We
can build an adjacency list starting from two sets
V and E, we will create a function that takes them
as parameters and insert every vertex and edge.
In code, we traverse vertices while
inserting, then we traverse edges,
each edge has two elements, the first one
is the source and the second one is the
destination, so we call add_edge() to add
the destination to neighbors of the source.
If it's an undirected graph, source will
also get added to neighbors of destination.
Now we've implemented the basic operations with
an adjacency list, but know that we won't often
add/remove vertices and edges, this is why
sometimes we don't even need this Graph class,
we directly create the hash table and start
working. In this lecture, we learnt about the
adjacency list, a list of key value pairs
where we map each vertex to its neighbors,
we've seen how to implement it, how to implement
its main operations, we didn't talk about their
time complexity, because I wanted to let that
for the lecture where we will compare between
the adjacency list, and the alternative we will
see in the next lecture: the adjacency matrix.
See you in the next lecture to
talk about the adjacency matrix.